# Nicolasa
*Data sonification performance by Guillermo Montecinos for Generative Music class, NYU ITP Fall 2018.*

*Nicolasa* is a data sonification piece created from the real operation of the Chilean electric power system. The daily generation of the biggest dam power plants are used to create a sound landscape in which the voice of Nicolasa Quintremán demands to the Chilean Government and the Spanish Company Endesa to respect the territory of the Mapuche in southern Chile.

The original idea for this performance was to sonify the data of the entire Chilean power system in order to describe the internal interactions between the different kind of technologies that compose it. For that purpose, hydropower plants were going to be mapped to high pitch notes played by instruments as strings or piano, whilst thermal power plants -as coal or gas- were going to be mapped to low pitch notes, played by analog -robust- synths.

During my investigation I realized that this performance was an opportunity to unveil the political issues that underlie the development of the Chilean power system. In many cases, the construction of power plants has had an irreversible impact for the communities that live in the area before the projects were designed. This is the case of many small fishing creeks that were deeply affected by coal thermal power plants constructed in the shore near them, which used sea water to refresh their system, killing the fishes of the area. Similar cases occurred in southern areas were wind farms attempted to be installed in sacred land for indigenous communities which are protected by the [Convention C169](https://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C169).

## Historical Context
The most emblematic case is Ralco, a hydro power plant developed by the Spanish company Endesa which in the process of construction forced an entire community of Mapuche people to move from their land and flooded an ancestral graveyard. The construction of this project was supported by the Chilean Government.
Nicolasa Quintremán was the Mapuche leader who fought against Endesa and the Government and in her words can be found the proud and respect for her culture and her homeland. *"We will never get out of here, unless we are dead. Because we own the right, we own the mother, is a live mother, is the land. Mi mother died, but the land is alive and will live forever."*

For this performance, the music was built from the Chilean power system real performance data. Three MIDI tracks were created using [MIDIUtil](https://pypi.org/project/MIDIUtil/) for Python, for three different instruments. A base track contains the base harmony of the song, which is built using the data of eight dam power plants of Chile. A MIDI note was assigned to each plant depending on the maximum power of it, whilst the daily generation was mapped to the velocity of the MIDI note.
The main melody of the piece is "played" by Ralco, which daily generation was mapped to the possible MIDI notes centered in 60, following the C maj scale. Velocity for this track is fixed in 100.
To complete the sound landscape a bass line was added which pitch is mapped from the daily generation of the coal thermal plant Bocamina II. This power plant is located in the bay area of Lota/Coronel in southern Chile, near Concepción, one of the most polluted areas in the country due to thermal plants.

The midi file generated in the process was exported to Ableton Live, where VST were assigned to play piano in the case of dam plants and cello in the case of Ralco. Both of them were also processed with a Digidelay pedal. The bass line was used to control a Moog Minitaur via MIDI. To complete the piece, the voice of Nicolasa Quintremán was imported as samples in order to the narrative of the piece. All the samples were taken from the video documentary [Ralco](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qci-M7_Xmo8) by Estéban Larraín.

The full piece can be found [here](https://github.com/guillemontecinos/itp_fall_2018_generative_music/blob/master/week_4/performance/data/Nicolasa_data_sonification_1.mp3).
